---
title: "Edward Hopper"
tags:
categories: 
draft: true
date: 2021-10-01T13:31:02+05:30
---

all figures are in a frozen melancholic mood, as if they want to say so much yet they just exist. Striking figures with faces turned towards the viewer, sharply staring the audience in the face (Office at night). People in this painting are alone, terribly alone and contemplative. Even in "New York Movie", a painting of a theater with many people, he creates a magical portrayal of a sad and aloof lady, hands on her cheek, distant from the pandemonium of people. We are somehow drawn towards her and forget the theater, her mere appearance evokes sympathy in our hearts.  

His study of nude are of course meticulous and plenty/ample.

someone on the internet said, "you can sleep inside a Edward Hopper painting". Rightfully. The serene calmness of his painting, almost errie tranquility and choice of a handful of figures give his painting a kind of vast space for the viewer to reach in and explore.  

open spaces (South Carolina Morning, Cape Cod Evening)

**light and shadows**. **sunlight** figures staring out huge windows at bright, sunlit, almost delectable outsides.  (Sunlight in a Cafeteria, Second Story Sunlight, Morning in a City, Morning Sun, Cape Cod Morning, High Noon, A Woman in the Sun). (Summer Evening) captures two figures, a male and a female, caught up in a sort of tussle, a conflict between themselves, a conflict within themselves? Their expressions are forlorn and...quiet

house interiors, closed compartments like train coachs (Compartment C Car, Chair Car), lobbies 
(Hotel lobby), rooms (Hotel by a Railroad, Hotel Window, Hotel Room) of course.  

architecture (House by the railroad)

crisp straight lines, almost perfect realist perspective of objects. slightly utopic, house walls without blemishes or moss outgrowth, roads and streets perfectly paved without a blemish. 


## Famous works
Chop Suey
Nighthawks
People in the Sun
Railroad sunset

## Sensuality 

(Night windows) An intimate moment of a lady from a intrusive, almost voyueristic perspective.

All his nudes. (Evening wind, etching) (Summer interior)