---
title: "Music Taste Sep 2023"
tags:
categories: 
draft: true
date: 2023-09-13T09:50:00+05:30
---

TODO: Include links

TODO: Include lyrics

I have always found it difficult to write about music. In fact, right now, I’m not sure what I intend to write; just that I want to. That’s the thing about music, it is so intimate and personal that I can ramble about my experiences of listening to a song and it wouldn’t elicit more than a nod from others. Maturity is, indeed, learning not to spam Instagram stories with Spotify recommendations.

> Wise men enjoy their music privately.
~Basil, right now :P

Ironically enough, this post is exactly that. It’s a humble personal effort to note a few noteworthy artists who have kept me company. It is a nod to that group of rebels and creatives who have made me smile when I desperately needed to. 

—

TL;DR: My favourite genre is rock.

The realisation of a passionate audioscape that is promised right from the first thump on the bass drums or the absolute hypnotic experience of floating on the notes of a lively electric lick; ah yes, that’s why I like rock.

This observation is further supported by my latest listening trends on Spotify. 




4 out of 10 genres are rock derivatives and the top genre is clearly plain ol’ rock. I’m also happy to see that I have some deviation and exploration going on. 

If you’re interested, the stats are generated by this no-bullshit website.
 
—

Just like any Gen Z kid growing up in a third world developing country, my exposure to Western culture was replete and filled with awe. Like my friends, I saw it as a ticket to escape the bland bourgeois. Perhaps, this is most evident in my music legacy which started right at Led Zeppelin, Beatles, GnR, Queen, and the whole gang. Admittedly, developing an ear to bear Nirvana et. al. for an innocent 9th grader required some active effort. But with the simultaneous building of a “strong cultural foundation”, I subconsciously got conditioned into idolising these artists. 

There was this phase when I used to listen to “Rock Classics” on Spotify for 12 hours on loop! I have happy memories of getting psyched at the opening riff of Sweet Child O’ Mine by Guns and Roses, and getting awestruck at that crazy Free Bird 10 minute solo. The near-celestial experience of listening to Radiohead (Let Down and Paranoid Android) for the first time and realising the genius that you’re listening to. Polyphia (“G.O.A.T.”), RHCP (Snow(Hey Oh)) , U2, Oasis (Slide<sup>1</sup>), The Who - all of them have expanded my auditory experiences and it is not so much the notoriety of rigid structure of rock songs but the creativity within them - the so-called “good parts”. And I can’t put a name to it so I’ll leave it at that. 

And then, I began discovering the ingenious rock talents. Take for example, the absolutely raw and exposed “Mindstreet” by Kochi-based band “Motherjane”. A little more contemporary and there’s upcoming rock variations offered by bands like The Western Ghats (“A Thousand Miles”), Basar by Daira, Riha by The Lost Symbols, a few works by The Yellow Dairy (“Udaan”) and others. Satu by the Indonesian band Dewa 19 deserves a shout-out. 

No doubt, I’m currently gravitating towards optimistic, preferably Urdu rock music. They have a certain sophistication and peace in Urdu that I’m unable to express. Take for instance, Farda by Bayaan and the delicate balance of words and rhythm that is contained in each crafted lyric. There’s “Laila” by Faridkot as opposed to “Layla” by Eric Clapton - both of these are love songs but with fundamentally different stylism. A disposition of Pakistani rock is incomplete without mentioning Junoon - who are quite good, although they seem to appeal to the humanist side of the soul.  

There’s a whole landscape for fusion artists like Anand Bhaskar Collective, The Anirudh Verma Collective, etc. that are producing good stuff and then there are renegades like Rahgir, Lifafa, and so on. I may also be tired of romance songs now. 

—


I can go on and on and you’ll just get bored. So, to keep this post appear sophisticated enough and save you from boredom, I’ll stop. I guess this gives a fairly reasonable “snapshot” of my current music tastes. It doesn’t aim to be complete and it needn’t be. 


1: You almost thought I would mention Wonderwall, right? Haha.



