---
title: "Year in Books: 2022"
tags:
categories: 
date: 2023-01-05T00:49:41+05:30
---

1. {{<ds sum="**Fierce People | Dirk Wittenhorn**">}}

A good first read of the year. A thriller, romance, and coming-of-age novel all wrapped in one.

I'm glad I read the book before I'm going to watch the movie. I couldn't put it down once I started. I wrote an in-depth [post](/post/fierce-people/) so I won't bore you here.
{{</ds>}}

2. {{<ds sum="**Bright Lights, Big City | Jay McInerney**">}}

This book presents one of the most elucidated, explicit, and candid portrayals of eighties New York. The protagonist works at the Department of Factual Verification at a reputed magazine in NYC, has a beautiful model wife and lives a life of vain and vanity with his dramatic friend, Tad. But just when one begins to think he has achieved it all, his life begins to fall apart.
The book explores the gray region of materialistic wants and possessions and how detached it is from what one truly seeks in life.
PS: The peculiar narration perspective of the prose was slightly disorienting for me.

{{</ds>}}

3. {{<ds sum="**Kari | Amruta Patil**">}}
A poignant braindump enveloped in grosteque and charming visuals. Introspective, deep, and witty. Given the fact that I don't read much graphic novels, this was a welcome change.

PS: Got recommended from a bookclub group. I'm allowing myself the freedom to change and that is important.

{{</ds>}}

4. {{<ds sum="**The Man Who Solved the Market | Gregory Zuckerman**">}}


A biographic narrative of Jim Simons, the mathematician who founded Renaissance Tech and kickstarted the quant revolution. His Medallion fund continues to be one of the greatest successes of investment trading. This is a thoroughly researched account doesn't simply boast of the genius Simons deserves but also reveals his human side. How he managed employees and interacted with them. How he suffered two tragedies in his life when he lost two sons.

An extravagant spender, left-inclined rational who, in later life, focused his money into combating disease, math education, and space exploration. This is the story of how one man went against the odds and challenges and paved the way for a totally radical method of trading changing forever the face of investment trading.

Wow, this one took me more time than I expected, partially due to acad work and partially due to the biographical nature of the text. I wrote a post inspired by the book [here](/post/the-quant-frenzy-a-crude-forecast/).
{{</ds>}}

5. {{<ds sum="**When Breath Becomes Air | Paul Kalanithi**">}}
An autobiographical account of a neurosurgeon who succumbed to cancer. But to describe Paul as just any neurosurgeon is a grave underestimation of this inspiring and incredible man.

In his (sadly, only) work, he lays bare the working of his mind, his intelligent questions and his quest to find answers to them, his intimate thoughts during surgeries and diagnosis, his beliefs about mortality and life and faith and God. Through this book, one doesn't simply read about a man who met an unfair fate, but of a truly inquisitive mind, equally versed in literature and medicine. One, who actively sought the company of great men, whose love for words shines through the eloquent prose. One who was deeply curious about death and mortality, and challenged death both as a healer and a patient.

Paul wrote, "You can't ever reach perfection, but you can believe in an asymptote towards which you're ceaselessly striving."
{{</ds>}}

6. {{<ds sum="**One Day | David Nicholls**">}}

"One Day" by David Nicholls is a drama-romance novel with a refreshing premise. It examines the life of two individuals *on a particular day each year* from twenty-two years to forty years or so. It explores how life tends to play out in the real world with laughter and grief all muddle until at the end we are left with a bittersweet feeling of *wanting to do more*. It is a book about lost opportunities and seizing the moment and all that.

> "The city had defeated her, just like they said it would. Like some overcrowded party, no-one had noticed her arrival, and no-one would notice if she left."    
> ~One Day, D. Nicholls

It has a romantic arc to it (of course) with two lovers in a confused state, unable to simultaneously be away and close to each other.  Dexter Mayhew, the zany, cocky, and the "chaotic" against Emma Morley, the quiet, nerdy Northerner. Sample this, After living his youth through debauchery and disruption, Dex finally grows up: *"An orgy won‘t care for you when you‘re old."* It ends bittersweet maybe as a homage to life itself with comments such as "You start out wanting to change the world through language, and end up thinking it‘s enough to tell a few good jokes." I enjoyed it.

PS: This was on my list for a looong time. Well, can watch the movie now (finally!!). I don't think this required a full post so here we are.

{{</ds>}}    

7. {{<ds sum="**Algorithms to Live By | Brian Christian and Thomas L. Griffiths**">}}

An attempt to apply computer science concepts to solve real-life day-to-day problems. An thought-provoking book with a nicely curated list of CS concepts. Particularly liked the beginning chapters.    

{{</ds>}}
